
.. _ionchambers:

Ion chamber signal chains
=========================

In the 2023-3 and 2024-1 cycles, BMM went through a transition in how
direct beam signals (I\ :sub:`0`, I\ :sub:`t`, I\ :sub:`r`) are
measured.

The old system
--------------

BMM has been using the same ion chambers that were used at X23A2 at
the old NSLS.  They are excellent ion chambers |nd| robust, linear,
easy to use.  At BMM, we used a `QuadEM
<https://epics-modules.github.io/quadEM/quadEMDoc.html>`__
electrometer to read the current signal from each ion chamber.  The
QuadEm is a four-channel device, so I\ :sub:`0`, I\ :sub:`t`, and I\
:sub:`r` were fed into channels 1, 2, and 3.  The fourth channel was
occasionally used for an electron yield detector.

Voltage was supplied from the same Ortec high voltage supply used at
X23A2.  The Ortec device sits outside the hutch.  The high voltage
was fed via cabling through a roof labyrinth and patch panels.

An IOC for reading the QuadEM lives on ``xf06bm-ioc2`` and
communicates with the QuadEM device via a cat6 cable.

.. subfigure::  AB
   :layout-sm: AB
   :gap: 8px
   :subcaptions: above
   :name: old_IC
   :class-grid: outline

   .. image:: _images/instrumentation/old_IC.jpg

   .. image:: _images/instrumentation/quadem.jpg

   (Left) The old I\ :sub:`r` detector.  (Right) The quadem
   electrometer used to measure the three old-style ion chambers.


The new system
--------------

The new ion chambers are integrated devices.  The low half of the
enclosure is a gas-filled volume with capacitor plates made from
printed circuit board.  The plates are guarded at both ends and
upright print circuit board pieces are used to guard the fringes of
the fields.  These upright pieces are strips of copper bridged by
surface-mounted resistors acting as a sequence of voltage dividers.
This keeps the field lines art the periphery of the capacitor plates
nicely parallel.

The upper part of the enclosure has the full signal chain and a
voltage supply.  This includes an amplifier, an analog-to-digital
converter, and a microprocessor running an embedded Debian system and
a two-channel version of the QuadEM IOC.  The voltage supply is fully
adjustable up to 2000 V, but are run at 200 V.

The electronics package and the voltage supply are powered a 6 V DC
power supply.  A cat6 cable for each ion chamber allows the IOCs to
communicate on the INST network.

The ion chambers also have an optical fiber input port so that data
can be time stamped with the global timing signal from the
accelerator.  This will be used in the near future to implement
continuous scanning on the monochromator.



.. _fig-new_IC:
.. figure:: _images/instrumentation/new_IC.jpg
   :target: _images/new_IC.jpg
   :width: 70%
   :align: center

   The new I\ :sub:`0` detector with integrated electronics and
   voltage supply.

Configuration in bsui profile
-----------------------------

It is intended to be easy to configure ``bsui`` to switch easily
between ion chambers and electrometers.

In `BMM_configuration.ini
<https://github.com/NSLS-II-BMM/profile_collection/blob/master/startup/BMM_configuration.ini>`__
there are boolean parameters for setting the various electrometer
signal chains.  These, in turn, set internal parameters in the bsui
profile or enabling the different signal chains.

Editing the INI refile will require restarting ``bsui``.

These internal parameters are used to synchronize setting
integration times across the various signal chains via the
`LockedDwellTimes
<https://github.com/NSLS-II-BMM/profile_collection/blob/master/startup/BMM/dwelltime.py#L40>`__
object.

Each new ion chamber in use needs to have its flag set to ``True``.

The QuadEM and each individual ion chamber will be configured if
available on the network.  If the network connection cannot be
established, a ``noisy_det`` from ``ophyd.sim`` is created with the
same name.

.. note:: Even with all 3 new ion chambers in place and in use,
   the QuadEM device will still be made.  This will allow use of
   electron yield and other detectors as well as measurement of any
   other current signals.
