..
   This document was developed primarily by a NIST employee. Pursuant
   to title 17 United States Code Section 105, works of NIST employees
   are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Thus
   this repository may not be licensed under the same terms as Bluesky
   itself.

   See the LICENSE file for details.

.. role:: key
    :class: key

.. _xafs:

XAFS scans
==========

The simplest access to an XAFS scan starts by editing an `INI file
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file>`_.  This is a simple
keyword/value system where the keyword is separated from the value by
an equals sign and each line contains a single keyword/value pair.

This file captures the set of metadata that the user supplies to
specify the details of the step scan, the basic configuration of the
beamline, and some details about the sample preparation.  Most of this
metadata is captured in the beamline database and written to the
header of the output data files.

This file is typically stored in the same folder where the data files
are written and is called by name when running an XAFS scan.

Note that the concepts and language used in the INI file is repeated
throughout the spreadsheets used for :numref:`beamline automation
(Section %s) <automation>`.


.. _ini:

The INI file
------------

.. sourcecode:: ini
   :linenos:

   [scan]
   filename      = cufoil
   experimenters = Betty Cooper, Veronica Lodge, Archibald Andrews

   element    = Cu
   edge       = K
   sample     = Cu metal
   prep       = standard foil
   comment    = Welcome to BMM

   nscans     = 3
   start      = next

   # mode is transmission, fluorescence, both, or reference
   mode       = transmission

   ##  regions relative
   ##  to e0:         1      2      3      4
   bounds     = -200    -30     -10   15.5    15k
   steps      =      10     2.0    0.3    0.05k
   times      =      0.5    0.5    0.5    0.25k


Here is a complete explanation of the contents of the INI file.

``filename`` (line 2)
   The stub for the names of the output data files and the
   snapshots. In the example above, the files written disk will be
   called ``cufoil.001``, ``cufoil.002``, and so on.

``experimenters`` (line 3)
   The name of the participants in the measurement. Because all data
   and metadata reside in a database, specifying experimenter names
   makes it easy to search the database for data associated with a
   specific person.

``element`` (line 5)
   The one- or two-letter symbol for the element.  The edge energy,
   ``e0``, will be looked up using ``element`` and ``edge``.

``edge`` (line 6)
   The symbol (``K``, ``L3``, ``L2``, ``L1``) of the edge being
   measured.

``sample`` (line 7)
   This is intended to capture the stoichiometry or composition of the
   sample being measured.

``prep`` (line 8)
   This is intended to capture the details of how the sample was
   prepared for the XAFS measurement.

``comment`` (line 9)
   This is for anything else you might want to say about your sample.

``nscans`` and ``start`` (lines 11 - 12)
   These are used to form the file extension of the output data file.
   They indicate the starting value of the number used as the file
   extension and how many repetitions of the scan to make.  The file
   extension is always a zero-padded, three-digit number,
   e.g. :file:`cufoil.001`, :file:`cufoil.002`, and so on.

   The most common value for this parameters is the word ``next``, in
   which case the ``folder`` will be searched for files starting with
   ``filename`` and ending in a number.  The subsequent number will be
   used.  E.g. if ``cuedge.007`` is the highest numbered file in the
   ``cuedge`` sequence, running XAFS again using the same INI file
   will start with ``cuedge.008``.

   ``start`` can also be a positive integer, in which case it will be
   the first number used in the sequence of scans.  So if the value is
   137, the first file will be called ``cufoil.137``.

``mode`` (line 15)
   Indicate how data should be displayed on screen during a scan.  The
   options are ``transmission``, ``fluorescence``, ``both``, or
   ``reference``.  ``both`` means to display *both* the transmission
   and fluorescence during the scan.

   This parameter also controls what gets written to the output data
   files. In all cases, the signals from I0, It, and Ir are written to
   the data file.  If ``mode`` is ``fluorescence`` or ``both``, then 4
   columns related to the fluorescence detector are also written. The
   columns are labeled something like ``Cu1``, ``Cu2``, ``Cu3``, and
   ``Cu4`` (where ``Cu`` would be replaced by the symbol of the element

Comments begin with the hash (``#``) character and are ignored.



Scan regions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In a typical step scan, we measure data on a coarse grid in the
pre-edge, a fine grid through the edge region, and on a constant grid
in photoelectron wavenumber in the extended region.  The ``bounds``,
``steps``, and ``times`` keywords (lines 19-21) are used to set this
grid.


``bounds`` indicates the energies |nd| relative to the ``e0`` value
|nd| where the step sizes and dwell times will change.  There **must**
always be one more value in the ``bounds`` list than in the ``steps``
and ``times`` lists.

For the ``bounds`` and ``steps`` lists, values **must** be either a
number or a string consisting of a number followed by the letter
``k``.  Numbers followed by ``k`` are interpreted as being values in
photoelectron wavenumber and are only sensible above the edge.

You may switch back and forth between energy and wavenumber values.
The ``bounds`` and ``steps`` lists are converted to energy values
before being used.

In the ``bounds`` lists, an energy value indicates an energy below or
above the ``e0`` value.  A wavenumber value inidcates a wavenumber
value above the edge.

In the ``steps`` list, an energy value indicates a step size in eV.  A
wavenumber value indicates a step size in |AA|:sup:`-1`.

In the ``times`` list, a number indicates a dwell time in seconds.  A
number followed by ``k`` indicates that the dwell time will grow as a
function of wavenumber above the edge.  I.e., a value of ``0.25k``
means that the dwell time will be 1 second at 4 |AA|:sup:`-1`, 2
seconds at 8 |AA|:sup:`-1`, and so on.


More options
~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several aspects of the XAFS scan plan that can be enabled or
disabled from the INI file.  The sample INI file written by the
:numref:`BMMuser.begin_experiment() command (Section %s) <start_end>`
does not include these options, but they can be added to the INI file
if needed.

``e0``
   The edge energy for the element and edge of this measurement.  This
   is the energy reference for the ``bounds``.  Normally, the
   tabulated value determined from ``element`` and ``edge`` will be
   used.  This can be specified to override the tabulated value.

``snapshots``
   ``True`` to take :numref:`snapshots (Section %s) <snap>` from the
   XAS webcam, USB cameras, and analog camera before beginning the
   scan sequence.  ``False`` to skip the snapshots.  Default: ``True``

``channelcut``
  ``True`` to measure XAFS with the monochromator in pseudo-channelcut
  mode.  ``False`` to measure in fixed exit mode.  Default: ``True``

``rockingcurve``
  ``True`` to measure a :numref:`rocking curve scan (Section %s)
  <special-linescans>` after moving to the pseudo-channelcut mode
  energy.  Default: ``False``

``bothways``
  ``True`` to measure XAFS in both directions of the monochromator.
  ``False`` to always measure in the positive energy (negative angle)
  direction.  Default: ``False``

``htmlpage`` 
  ``False`` to disable writing of the :numref:`static HTML dossier
  (Section %s) <dossier>`.  Default: ``True``

``ththth`` 
  ``True`` to measure with :numref:`Si(333) reflection (Section %s)
  <use333>` of the Si(111) monochromator .  Default: ``False``

.. 
  ``usbstick``
     ``True`` will examine the user-supplied filename for characters
     that cannot be part of a `filename
     <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filename#Reserved_characters_and_words>`_
     on a standard USB memory stick.  If any are found, the filename
     will be modified in a way that retains the meaning of the replaced
     characters, but which can be successfully written to a memory
     stick.  Since this is mostly an issue with Windows file systems,
     users who want to do  their data analysis on a Windows computer
     should use this option.  :numref:`See Section %s <usbsafe>`.
     Default: ``True``



   You can explicitly specify a destination folder for the data and other
   output files.  This is not a great idea, but might be useful in
   special situations.  The output folder is usually specified
   :numref:`when starting an experiment (Section %s) <start_end>` and
   rarely needs to be changed during the course of an experiment.
   
   ``folder``
      The fully resolved path to the data folder


k-weighted integration times
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As discussed above, you can specify k-weighted integration times in
the EXAFS region.  While not strictly necessary, it is nice to choose
scan boundaries and integration times that do not result in a
discontinuity in integration time at the transition into the EXAFS
region.

At the bluesky command line, use the ``bounds()`` tool to help come up
with scan parameters that have approximately continuous dwell times as
the scan transitions into the k-weighted region.

For example, consider a scan with a 1 second base time, transitioning
into dwell times of k/4 in the EXAFS regions:

.. code-block:: python

   > bounds(base=1, coef=1/4)

   # base dwell time = 1.00 seconds, 0.25k weighting
   # transition energy = 61.0 eV above the edge

   bounds = -200   -30   -2    25    61.0    14k
   steps  =     10    2     0.30  0.05k  0.05k
   times  =     1.00  1.00  1.00  0.25k  0.25k

Another example, a scan with a 1/2 second base time, transitioning
into dwell times of k/2 in the EXAFS regions:

.. code-block:: text

   > bounds(1/2, 1/2)

   # base dwell time = 0.50 seconds, 0.50k weighting
   # transition energy = 3.8 eV above the edge

   bounds = -200   -30   -2    3.8    25    14k
   steps  =     10    2     0.30  0.30   0.05k
   times  =     0.50  0.50  0.50  0.50k  0.50k

The strings for ``bounds``, ``steps``, and ``times`` can then be
cut-n-pasted into an :numref:`automation spreadsheet (Section %s)
<automation>` or an :numref:`INI file (Section %s) <ini>`.

Arguments of the ``bounds()`` tool:


``base`` 
      (float) The base integration time in seconds, usually 0.5 or 1
      second.  The default is a half second -- that is, the dwell
      times leading up to the k-weighted region will be a half second.

``coef`` 
      (float) The coefficient of k to use for the k-weighted dwell
      times.  The default is a k coefficient of 1/4.

``end`` 
      (string of int or float) The end value of the bounds list.  The
      default is ``'14k'``. 

``edge`` 
      (float) The step size through the end in eV.  The default is 0.3 eV.



.. _howlong:

Scan run time
-------------

To get an approximation of the time a scan will take, do::

  howlong('scan')

The argument is the path to the INI file described above.  Like for
the ``xafs()`` command, the INI file is presumed to be in the user's
data folder and the ``.ini`` need not be specified.  It is assumed
that the INI file ends in ``.ini``.

If you leave off the argument, you will be shown a numbered list of
all :file:`.ini` files in your data folder, something like this:

.. sourcecode:: text

  Select your INI file:

    1: Fe.ini
    2: Mn.ini
    3: Zr.ini
    4: scan.ini

    r: return

  Select a file > 

Select number of the :file:`.ini` file you want to read.

This will make a guess of scan time for an individual scan using a
rather crude heuristic for scan overhead.  It will also multiply by
the number of scans to give a total time in hours for the scan
sequence.

.. code-block:: text

   reading ini file: /home/bravel/BMM_Data/303169/scan.ini

   Each scan will take about 17.9 minutes
   The sequence of 6 scans will take about 1.8 hours



.. _usbsafe:

Safe filenames for USB sticks
-----------------------------

`These characters are problematic for filenames
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filename#Reserved_characters_and_words>`_:

.. code-block:: text

      ? * / \ % : | " < >

While there is no issue using these characters in filenames on the
beamline computer, you will find that files containing these names
cannot be written to a normal USB memory stick.  The file system used
on many memory sticks (`FAT32
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB_flash_drive#File_system>`__) does
not allow those characters in filenames.  This is true even if the
system the memory stick is connected to will allow those characters
(i.e. the beamline linux computer).


.. table:: Character translations in filenames
   :name:  usb-characters

   ================   ==================   =======================
    character name     character            substitution string
   ================   ==================   =======================
    question mark      |mquad| ?            ``_QM_``		      
    asterisk           |mquad| |ast|        ``_STAR_``
    forward slash      |mquad| /            ``_SLASH_``		      
    backslash          |mquad| \\           ``_BACKSLASH_``		      
    percent            |mquad| %            ``_PERCENT_``		      
    colon              |mquad| :            ``_COLON_``		      
    vertical bar       |mquad| |verbar|     ``_VERBAR_``		      
    greater than       |mquad| >            ``_GT_``		      
    less than          |mquad| <            ``_LT_``		      
   ================   ==================   =======================


As an example, a filename like 

.. code-block:: text

   Fe precipitate <60 mM

will be converted to 

.. code-block:: text

   Fe precipitate _LT_60 mM

such that the output files will be called

.. code-block:: text

   Fe precipitate _LT_60 mM.001
   Fe precipitate _LT_60 mM.002
   ...

Note that spaces are fine in filenames as are all the other keyboard
characters.


.. _xafsscan:

Run an XAFS scan
----------------

To run a scan, do this::

  RE(xafs('scan'))

The argument is the path to the INI file, as described above.
Specifically, the INI file is assumed to be in the user's data folder
and is assumed to have the ``.ini`` extension.  The location of the
user's data folder is set when :numref:`beginning an experiment
(Section %s) <start_end>`.

This plan is a wrapper around `BlueSky's scan_nd() plan
<https://nsls-ii.github.io/bluesky/plans.html#multi-dimensional-scans>`_.
It does the following chores:

#. Verifies the content of the INI file with a user prompt

#. Makes an entry in the :numref:`experimental log (Section %s)
   <logfile>` indicating the INI contents and the current motor
   positions of all the important motors

#. Takes :numref:`snapshots (Section %s) <snap>` of the XAS webcam and
   the analog camera near the sample

#. Moves the monochromator to the center of the angular range of
   motion of the scan and enters pseudo-channel-cut mode

#. If using the Xspress3 to measure fluorescence with the Si-drift
   detector, an XRF spectrum will be recorded at that energy.

#. Generates a plotting subscription appropriate to the value of
   ``mode`` in the INI file

#. Enables a :numref:`set of suspenders (Section %s) <interrupt>`
   which will suspend the current XAFS scan in the event of a beam
   dump or a shutter closing (the suspenders are disabled at the end
   of the scan sequence)

#. Moves to the beginning of the scan range and begins taking scans
   using the ``scan_nd()`` plan and `cyclers
   <https://matplotlib.org/cycler/>`_ for energy values and dwell
   times constructed from the values of ``bounds``, ``steps``, and
   ``times`` read from the INI file

#. For each scan, notes the start and end times of the scan in the
   :numref:`experimental log (Section %s) <logfile>` along with the
   unique and transient IDs of the scan in the beamline database

#. After each scan, extracts the data table from the database and writes
   an ASCII file in the `XDI format
   <https://github.com/XraySpectroscopy/XAS-Data-Interchange>`_

#. After the full sequence of scans, write :numref:`a dossier (Section
   %s) <dossier>` containing a fairly complete record of the
   measurement |nd| including a crude first pass at the data reduction
   and processing |nd| made by the XAFS plan.

The plan also provides some tools to cleanup correctly (i.e. kill
certain motors, reset certain parameters) after a scan sequence ends
or is terminated.


Location of scan.ini file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You may start the XAFS scan by doing::

  RE(xafs())

without specifying an argument.  In that case, your data folder will
be searched for INI files and you will presented with an option menu
of the INI files found, as explained in :numref:`Section %s <howlong>`.

You may also specify which INI file to use.  When you launch an XAFS
scan doing::

  RE(xafs('myscan'))

This assumes that there is a file called ``myscan.ini`` in the user's
data directory.  Note that you can drop the ``.ini`` |nd| the program
is smart enough to know that you want the ``.ini`` file by that name.
So that is completely equivalent to::

  RE(xafs('myscan.ini'))

For instance, if the user's worksapce folder is
``/home/xf06bm/Workspace/Visitors/Jane Doe/2025-01-30``, then the scan
plan will look for the file ``/home/xf06bm/Workspace/Visitors/Jane
Doe/2025-01-30/scan.ini``.

You can also explicitly state where your INI file is located, as in::

  RE(xafs('/home/xf06bm/someplace/else/scan.ini'))

In that case, the explicit location of the INI file will be used.

The workspace folder is set when the ``new_experiment()`` command is
run at the beginning of the experiment (:numref:`see Section %s
<start_end>`).  To know the locations of the workspace folder, simply
type ``BMMuser.workspace`` at the command line and hit :key:`Enter`.


.. _interrupt:

Interrupt an XAFS scan
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several scenarios where you may need to interrupt or halt an
XAFS scan.

Pause a scan and *resume*
  You can pause a scan at any time by
  hitting :key:`Ctrl`-:key:`C`  :red:`twice`.  This will return you to
  the command line, leaving the scan in a paused state.  To *resume*
  the scan, do::

    RE.resume()

  The scan will then continue from where it left off.

*Stop* a scan
  You can pause a scan at any time by hitting
  :key:`Ctrl`-:key:`C`   :red:`twice`.  This will return you to the
  command line, leaving the scan in a paused state.  To *end* the
  scan, do::

    RE.stop()

  The scan will then terminate, returning all motors and detectors to
  their resting state.

  This will also terminate a paused scan::

    RE.abort()

  The difference is that ``RE.stop()`` will tag the database entry of
  the current scan as ``success`` while ``RE.abort()`` will tag it as
  ``failed``.  In every other way, the two are equivalent |nd| each
  one will shut the scan down gracefully.

Pause a scan due to external events
  When the XAFS scan starts, it initiates a set of `suspenders
  <https://nsls-ii.github.io/bluesky/state-machine.html#automated-suspension>`_
  which respond to various external events, such as a shutter closing
  or the ring current dumping.  When one of these suspenders triggers,
  the scan will enter a paused state.  It will resume once the
  condition causing the suspension is resolved.  For example, when the
  closed shutter is re-opened or current is restored to the ring.  In
  general, a short bit of time is required to pass once the suspension
  condition is resolved before the scan resumes.  For instance,
  5 seconds are allowed to pass after a shutter is re-opened.

`Here is a summary of pausing, resuming, and stopping scans using
BlueSky
<https://nsls-ii.github.io/bluesky/state-machine.html#summary>`_.

Revisit an XAFS scan
--------------------

.. admonition:: Needs to be verified

   Does this still work post-data-security?

Grab a database entry and write it to an XDI file::

  db2xdi('/path/to/data/file', '<id>')

The first argument is the name of the output data file.  The second
argument is either the scan's unique ID |nd| something like
``f6619ed7-a8e5-41c2-a499-f793b0fcacec`` |nd| or the scan's transient
id number.  Both the unique and transient ids can be found in
:numref:`the dossier (Section %s) <dossier>`.

.. _macro:

Scan sequence macro
-------------------

.. note::

   Many types of experiments can be automated using the established,
   spreadsheet-based systems described in :numref:`Section %s
   <automation>`.  This section is helpful for those situation where
   you need to roll your own bespoke automation plans.

A macro at BMM is a short bit of python code which sequentially moves
motors and initiates scans.  A common way of doing this is to make an
INI file for each sample that intend to measure.  The macro then moves
to each sample and runs the ``xafs()`` for each sample using the same
INI file.

.. sourcecode:: python
   :linenos:

   def sample_sequence():
      '''User-defined macro for running a sequence of motor motions and
      XAFS measurements'''
      (ok, text) = BMM_clear_to_start()
      if ok is False:
         print(error_msg('\n'+text) + bold_msg('Quitting macro....\n'))
         return(yield from null())
    
      BMMuser.macro_dryrun = False
      BMMuser.prompt = False
      BMM_log_info('Beginning sample macro')
      def main_plan():
          ### ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          ### BOILERPLATE ABOVE THIS LINE -----------------------------------------------------------
          ##  EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
          #<--indentation matters!
    
          ## sample 1
          yield from slot(1)
          yield from xafs('sample1.ini')
          close_last_plot()                 # this command closes the plot on screen
    
          ## sample 2
          yield from slot(2)
          yield from xafs('sample2.ini')
          close_last_plot()

          ##  EDIT ABOVE THIS LINE
          ### BOILERPLATE BELOW THIS LINE -----------------------------------------------------------
          ### ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      def cleanup_plan():
          yield from end_of_macro()
        
      yield from bluesky.preprocessors.finalize_wrapper(main_plan(), cleanup_plan())    
      yield from end_of_macro()
      BMM_log_info('Sample macro finished!')

The commented (by ``#``) lines at lines 13-16 and 28-30 are comments
indicating that parts of the macro are intended for editing by the
user while other parts are boilerplate that make the macro work
correctly.  In general, you only want to edit the lines between those
two comment blocks, leaving the lines above and below untouched.

The calls to ``BMM_info()`` at lines 11 and 35 insert lines in the
:numref:`experiment log (Section %s) <log>` indicating the times that
the scan sequence begins and ends.

Setting the ``BMMuser.prompt`` parameter to ``False`` at line 9 skips
the step in the ``xafs()`` macro where the user is prompted to verify
that the scan is set up correctly.

This macro is for samples mounted on the sample wheel.  At lines 19
and 24, the wheel is rotated to the correct slot before launching the 
``xafs()`` command.

Alternately, you can use a single, master :file:`scan.ini` file that
covers all the metadata common to all the samples in a sequence.
Then, as part of the argument to the ``xafs()`` plan, specify those
metadata items specific to the sample. (This has proven to be the more
popular option among BMM users.)

.. sourcecode:: python
   :linenos:

   def sample_sequence():
      '''User-defined macro for running a sequence of motor motions and
      XAFS measurements'''
      (ok, text) = BMM_clear_to_start()
      if ok is False:
         print(error_msg('\n'+text) + bold_msg('Quitting macro....\n'))
         return(yield from null())
    
      BMMuser.macro_dryrun = False
      BMMuser.prompt = False
      BMM_log_info('Beginning sample macro')
      def main_plan():
          ### ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          ### BOILERPLATE ABOVE THIS LINE -----------------------------------------------------------
          ##  EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
          #<--indentation matters!
    
          ## sample 1
          yield from slot(1)
          yield from xafs('scan.ini', filename='samp1', sample='first sample')
          close_last_plot()                 # this command closes the plot on screen
    
          ## sample 2
          yield from slot(2)
          yield from xafs('scan.ini', filename='samp2', sample='another sample', comment='my comment')
          close_last_plot()

          ##  EDIT ABOVE THIS LINE
          ### BOILERPLATE BELOW THIS LINE -----------------------------------------------------------
          ### ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      def cleanup_plan():
          yield from end_of_macro()
        
      yield from bluesky.preprocessors.finalize_wrapper(main_plan(), cleanup_plan())    
      yield from end_of_macro()
      BMM_log_info('Sample macro finished!')

:numref:`Any keyword (Section %s) <ini>` from the INI file can be used
as a command argument in the call to ``xafs()``.  Arguments to
``xafs()`` will take priority over values in the INI file.


Assuming your macro file is stored in your data folder under the name
``macro.py``, you can load or reload the macro into the running
BlueSky session::

  %run -i BMMuser.data+'macro.py'

This creates (or overwrites) a new kind of plan called
``sample_sequence()`` (at line 1, you ``def``\ -ine a function of that
name). 

You can then run the macro by invoking the ``sample_sequence()``
function through the run engine::

  RE(scan_sequence())

Every time you edit the macro file, you **must** reload it into the
running BlueSky session.

The name of the macro file is not proscribed.  If it would be
convenient to have, say, ``macroFe.py`` and ``macroPt.py``, that's
fine.  Just be sure to explicitly ``%run -i`` the file using the
correct name.  Neither is the name of the command defined in the macro
proscribed.  It can be called almost anything (you should avoid
reserved words in Python and names already used for other things in
BlueSky) and run through the run engine (i.e. ``RE()``) like any other
BlueSky plan.




.. _xdiexample:


XAFS data file
--------------

XAFS data files are written to the `XDI format
<https://github.com/XraySpectroscopy/XAS-Data-Interchange>`_.  Here is
an example.  You can see how the metadata from the INI file and
elsewhere is captured in the output XDI file.

.. todo:: Document use of ``XDI_record`` dictionary to control which
	  xafs motors and/or temperatures get recorded in the XDI header

.. admonition:: New as of Fall 2024

   There is a new XDI header in use in BMM's datafiles:
   ``Scan.xspress3_hdf5_file``.  This captures the name of the
   associated HDF5 file for fluorescence XAS measurements.

   The value is the path to the asset location beneath the current
   proposal folder.

.. code-block:: text

   # XDI/1.0 BlueSky/1.3.0
   # Beamline.name: BMM (06BM) -- Beamline for Materials Measurement
   # Beamline.xray_source: NSLS-II three-pole wiggler
   # Beamline.collimation: paraboloid mirror, 5 nm Rh on 30 nm Pt
   # Beamline.focusing: torroidal mirror with bender, 5 nm Rh on 30 nm Pt
   # Beamline.harmonic_rejection: none
   # Detector.I0: 10 cm N2
   # Detector.I1: 25 cm N2
   # Detector.I2: 25 cm N2
   # Detector.fluorescence: SII Vortex ME4 (4-element silicon drift)
   # Element.symbol: Mo
   # Element.edge: K
   # Facility.name: NSLS-II
   # Facility.current: 374.3 mA
   # Facility.energy: 3.0 GeV
   # Facility.mode: top-off
   # Facility.GUP: 333333
   # Facility.SAF: 344344
   # Mono.name: Si(311)
   # Mono.d_spacing: 1.6376385 Å
   # Mono.encoder_resolution: 0.0000050 deg/ct
   # Mono.angle_offset: 15.9943932 deg
   # Mono.scan_mode: pseudo channel cut
   # Mono.scan_type: step
   # Mono.direction: forward in energy
   # Sample.name: Sedovite
   # Sample.prep: speck of mineral in a holder in a gel cap
   # Sample.x_position: 2.750
   # Sample.y_position: 147.670
   # Scan.edge_energy: 20000.0
   # Scan.start_time: 2018-07-08T16:26:49
   # Scan.end_time: 2018-07-08T16:44:22
   # Scan.transient_id: 1447
   # Scan.uid: 442bb882-1e46-4607-a12d-1bca2efa74af
   # Scan.plot_hint: (DTC1 + DTC2 + DTC3 + DTC4) / I0  --  ($7+$8+$9+$10) / $4
   # Column.1: energy eV
   # Column.2: requested_energy eV
   # Column.3: measurement_time seconds
   # Column.4: I0 nA
   # Column.5: It nA
   # Column.6: Ir nA
   # Column.7: DTC1
   # Column.8: DTC2
   # Column.9: DTC3
   # Column.10: DTC4
   # Column.11: ROI1 counts
   # Column.12: ICR1 counts
   # Column.13: OCR1 counts
   # Column.14: ROI2 counts
   # Column.15: ICR2 counts
   # Column.16: OCR2 counts
   # Column.17: ROI3 counts
   # Column.18: ICR3 counts
   # Column.19: OCR3 counts
   # Column.20: ROI4 counts
   # Column.21: ICR4 counts
   # Column.22: OCR4 counts
   # ///////////
   # focused beam, Kyzylsai Dep., Chu-lli Mts., Zhambyl Dist., Kazakhstan 3852
   # -----------
   # energy  requested_energy  measurement_time  I0  It  Ir  DTC1  DTC2  DTC3  DTC4  ROI1  ICR1  OCR1  ROI2  ICR2  OCR2  ROI3  ICR3  OCR3  ROI4  ICR4  OCR4
   19809.967  19810.000  0.500  22.780277  28.026418  5.844915  3393.671531  3512.331211  2189.485830  2294.254018  2984.0  86162.0  79706.0  3085.0  86771.0  80213.0  2018.0  57884.0  55169.0  2085.0  64398.0  60757.0
   19820.016  19820.000  0.500  23.017712  28.316410  5.912596  3607.981130  3515.807498  2272.542220  2255.901234  3160.0  87991.0  81171.0  3088.0  87790.0  81205.0  2093.0  58242.0  55481.0  2036.0  66029.0  61927.0
   19830.022  19830.000  0.500  23.191409  28.546075  5.971688  3398.408050  3343.071835  2237.827496  2348.453171  2983.0  88018.0  81376.0  2930.0  88064.0  81298.0  2061.0  59218.0  56443.0  2120.0  66896.0  62787.0
   19840.073  19840.000  0.500  23.022700  28.346179  5.941913  3424.112880  3464.005608  2199.187023  2294.868496  3007.0  87171.0  80589.0  3042.0  87734.0  81137.0  2023.0  58516.0  55684.0  2075.0  66318.0  62324.0
   .
    .
     .


.. _telemetry:

Telemetry
---------

Whenever you run the ``xafs()`` plan or :numref:`import a spreadsheet
(Section %s) <automation>` with the ``xlsx()``, you are given an
estimate of how long it will take.  This is estimate is ... pretty
good.  Not great, but decent.  Here's where it comes from.

``xafs()`` plan time
  For each element, the database is searched for XAFS scans on that
  element that ran to completion.  The data base record has start and
  stop times for the scan as well as a record of point-by-point
  integration times.

  For each scan at an element, the sum of integration times is
  computed, as is the difference between the end and start times.  The
  difference between those is the overhead (monochromator movement and
  anything else the plan does between the issuing of the start and
  stop documents).  The average difference is computed and recorded.

  So, the estimated time for an ``xafs()`` plan is the sum of its
  integration times plus this historical average of overhead.

Additional ``xafs()`` plan overhead
  The ``xafs()`` plan does a bunch of measurements related to metadata
  prior to the start document for the scan being issued.  This is a
  little harder to compute from the database (certainly not
  impossible, but it hasn't yet been worked on), so Bruce has made an
  observation through experience to approximate the amount of time
  needed to capture photos, measure an XRF spectrum, move to the
  :numref:`pseudo-channelcut energy (Section %s) <dcm>`, etc.  When
  computing time for a spreadsheet, this is added to the time for each
  ``xafs()`` plan run.  Until this is measured properly, the value of
  ``BMMuser.tweak_xas_time`` is used.

Changing temperature
  For spreadsheets using the Linkam stage or Lakeshore temperature
  controller, times for temperature changes are made considering the
  ramp rate and the settling time.

Moving motors, rotating sample wheels
  Motor movement for a grid spreadsheet or wheel rotation for wheel
  spreadsheet are not considered in the time estimate.  The assumption
  is that the motors are fast compared to almost everything else.

Changing edges
  For the time estimate in a spreadsheet file, a flat 5 minutes is
  used.  The range of time for the :numref:`change_edge() (Sample %s)
  <pds>` command is about 2.5 minutes when moving between nearby edges
  in the same :numref:`photon delivery mode (Table %s)
  <photon_delivery_modes>` to about 7 minutes for a change between
  modes. So this is a source of error in a spreadsheet time estimate.

Aligning the glancing angle stage
  A flat 3 minutes is used to account for the time it takes to do the
  automated alignment.
  
For a single XAFS scan, the time estimate is the sum of the first two
items in the list above.  For a spreadsheet, all applicable items from
the list are added together for each row of the spreadsheet.  The
times for each row are added up.

.. warning:: The time estimate is a good faith estimate.  It should be
	     used as a decent suggestion, but high accuracy should not
	     be expected! 


.. _dataevaluation:

Data evaluation
---------------

The thing about :numref:`automation of measurements (Section %s)
<automation>` is that the beamline is left unattended for extended
periods.  Sometimes things happen at the unattended beamline,
detectors can malfunction, software can get into a weird state,
samples can fall off of sample holders.  In short, things can happen
that need human attention and intervention.

At BMM, we have a sort of a warning system for such things.  A machine
agent has been trained to recognize what XAFS data looks like.  When a
spectrum is measured that looks like data, i.e. it has an obvious edge
step towards the beginning of the spectrum which is followed by
oscillations, the data evaluator returns a positive result.  If the
measurement does not look like that, it returns a negative result.
Examples are shown in :numref:`Figure %s <dataeval>`.

The result of the data evaluation is printed to the screen.  More
importantly, it is posted to :numref:`Slack (Section %s) <slack>`
where it might be seen by the user or the beamline staff.


.. subfigure::  AB
   :layout-sm: AB
   :subcaptions: above
   :name: dataeval
   :class-grid: outline

   .. image:: _images/software/good_evaluation.png

   .. image:: _images/software/bad_evaluation.png

   Examples of data being evaluated as good (left) and bad (right) XAS
   data.  The data on the left has an obvious edge step followed by
   oscillations.  It, therefore, looks like XAFS data.  The data on
   the right is an example of a marginal measurement.  There `is` a
   step, but it's not very big.  Thus it looks like it might be a
   problematic measurement.  It certainly is something that needs the
   attention of a human.

This machine agent is a trained learning model.  It uses a corpus of
data measured at BMM and tagged by Bruce.  The corpus includes
hundreds of examples of good spectra and hundreds of examples of
problematic measurements of all sorts.  These are human-tagged as such
and trained using a `random forest classifier
<https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/ensemble.html#random-forests>`__.
Subsequent spectra are evaluated using this trained classifier.  This
evaluation happens upon completion of each XAFS scan repetition.

Experience so far with this model has been quite good.  The training
set is over 98% successful when tested against a subset of the
training corpus.  False positives (i.e. bad data identified as being
good data) are exceedingly rare.  False negatives (i.e. good data
falsely identified as bad data) are much more common, happening most
days. 

That's a fundamentally useful result.  A false negative draws human
attention to the beamline for a situation that might not require it.
Frequent false positives would be much more problematic.

All negative results are logged so that the training model can be
further refined by having a human tag each those negatives
appropriately and adding them to the training corpus.

The random forest (RF) classifier was chosen because it is fairly simple
and because it works well.  Also tested were K-neighbors (KN) and a
Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP).  KN is certainly the simplest of the
models tried |nd| it is the model usually associated with the `classic
iris classification problem
<https://kirenz.github.io/classification/docs/knn-iris.html>`__.  It
actually works quite well, although RF and MLP are both improvements.
MLP was the suggestion of a local machine learning expert and performs
similarly to RF on this trained data corpus.


Extract XRF spectra from fluorescence XAS 
-----------------------------------------

BMM offers a handy tool for examining the XRF spectra of a
fluorescence XAS scan on a point-by-point basis.  Given the UID of a
scan |nd| which can be found in :numref:`the dossier (Section %s)
<dossier>` or in :numref:`the header of the data file (Section %s)
<xdiexample>` |nd| you can plot the XRF spectrum at a given point in
the scan.

.. sourcecode:: python

   xrfat(uid, energy)

Here, ``uid`` is a string containing the scan UID and ``energy`` is
one of the following:

+ an energy point in the scan range, the nearest energy point will be
  used
+ a negative integer, the energy point that many steps from the *end*
  of the scan will be used
+ a positive integer (smaller than the first energy value in the
  scan), the energy point that many steps from the *beginning* of the
  scan will be used
+ a list of any of the above, resulting in XRF spectra from each
  energy in the list being over-plotted.

For example,

.. sourcecode:: python

   xrfat(uid, -1)

will plot the XRF spectrum measured at the last point in the scan.

Here's a good example of why this is useful.  Some visitors to BMM
were measuring a sample with a rather low concentration of neodymium
(L\ :sub:`3`\ edge energy of 6208).  The |chi|\ (k) data were
noticeably distorted about 330 eV (or about 9.3 inverse Angstrom)
above the edge.  This corresponds to the K edge energy (about 6539) of
Mn.  We eventually determined that the BN used as a diluant was
slightly contaminated with Mn.

Here are the plots from below and above the Mn K edge:

.. sourcecode:: python

   xrfat(uid, 6510)
   xrfat(uid, 6560)

.. subfigure::  AB
   :layout-sm: AB
   :gap: 8px
   :subcaptions: above
   :name: Ndsample
   :class-grid: outline

   .. image:: _images/software/Nd-6510.png

   .. image:: _images/software/Nd-6560.png

   (Left) The XRF spectra from the Nd-bearing sample measured at 6510 eV.
   (Right) The XRF spectra from the Nd-bearing sample measured at 6560 eV.

Those don't look very different.  However, overplotting the two
spectra and displaying on a log scale on the y-axis:

.. _fig-Ndcompare:
.. figure:: _images/software/Nd-compare.png
   :target: _images/Nd-compare.png
   :width: 70%
   :align: center

   The XRF spectra from the Nd-bearing sample measured at 6510 eV and
   at 6560 eV.  There is a very small peak at the Mn K\ |alpha|
   energy, marked by the green circle.

While tiny, this Mn contamination had a noticeable impact on the
measured EXAFS data.  This sort of forensic work is enabled by the
``xrfat`` command.

The plots shown in :numref:`Ndsample` can be overplotted using the
list argument of ``energy``, like so:

.. sourcecode:: python

   xrfat(uid, [6510, 6560])


The full signature of this function is

.. sourcecode:: python

   def xrfat(uid, energy=-1, xrffile=None, add=True, only=None, xmax=1500):

where 

``xrffile``
   If not None, is the name of the column data file to be written to
   the users ``XRF`` folder.

``add``
   If True, add the signals from the four channels

``only``
   If specified as an integer (1, 2, 3, or 4), plot only that detector
   channel

``xmax``
   Specify the maximum energy plotted on the x-axis in units of energy
   above the measured fluorescence line energy

.. _reference-wheel:

Reference spectra
-----------------

BMM has a wide variety of reference materials mounted in the reference
position.  The collection includes metal foils, metal powders, stable
oxides, or other stable compound of 44 of the elements measurable at
BMM.

The materials shown and listed below are always available for
measurement.  As part of the `command for changing edge
<https://nsls-ii-bmm.github.io/BeamlineManual/manage.html#change-energy>`__,
the reference wheel will rotate to the position of the selected
element.  Every XAS scan will include the signal from the I\ :sub:`r`
chamber (whether any signal makes it to that detector depends on the
sample being measured, of course).

The command for moving directly to a specific reference position is 

.. code-block:: python

   RE(reference('Xx'))

where ``Xx`` is the one- or two-letter symbol of the element.  See the
table below for the available elements.

.. _fig-refwheel:
.. figure:: _images/stages/ref_wheel.jpg
   :target: _images/ref_wheel.jpg
   :width: 70%
   :align: center

   The reference wheel at BMM

.. |Gaoxide|     replace:: Ga\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Geoxide|     replace:: GeO\ :sub:`2`
.. |Asoxide|     replace:: As\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Bioxide|     replace:: BiO\ :sub:`2`
.. |Yoxide|      replace:: Y\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Srtitanate|  replace:: SrTiO\ :sub:`3`
.. |Csnitrate|   replace:: CsNO\ :sub:`3`
.. |Lahydroxide| replace:: La(OH)\ :sub:`3`
.. |Ceoxide|     replace:: Ce\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Proxide|     replace:: Pr\ :sub:`6`\ O\ :sub:`11`
.. |Ndoxide|     replace:: Nd\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Smoxide|     replace:: Sm\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Euoxide|     replace:: Eu\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Gdoxide|     replace:: Gd\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Tboxide|     replace:: Tb\ :sub:`4`\ O\ :sub:`9`
.. |Dyoxide|     replace:: Dy\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Hooxide|     replace:: Ho\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Eroxide|     replace:: Er\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Tmoxide|     replace:: Tm\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Yboxide|     replace:: Yb\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Luoxide|     replace:: Lu\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`3`
.. |Rbcarbonate| replace:: RbCO\ :sub:`3`
.. |Hfoxide|     replace:: HfO\ :sub:`2`
.. |Taoxide|     replace:: Ta\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`5`
.. |Reoxide|     replace:: ReO\ :sub:`2`
.. |Ruoxide|     replace:: RuO\ :sub:`2`
.. |Brblue|      replace:: C\ :sub:`19`\ H\ :sub:`10`\ Br\ :sub:`4`\ O\ :sub:`5`\ S


.. table:: Reference wheel contents
   :name:  tab-reference-wheel
   :align: left

   =============      ========        ===================     ==============      ========        ===============
    Ring / slot       Element         Material                Ring / slot         Element         Material        
   =============      ========        ===================     ==============      ========        ===============
   **Outer 1**         empty           for alignment           **Inner 1**         Cs              |Csnitrate|
   **Outer 2**         Ti              foil                    **Inner 2**         La              |Lahydroxide|
   **Outer 3**         V               foil                    **Inner 3**         Ce              |Ceoxide|
   **Outer 4**         Cr              foil                    **Inner 4**         Pr              |Proxide|
   **Outer 5**         Mn              metal powder            **Inner 5**         Nd              |Ndoxide|
   **Outer 6**         Fe              foil                    **Inner 6**         Sm              |Smoxide|
   **Outer 7**         Co              foil                    **Inner 7**         Eu              |Euoxide|
   **Outer 8**         Ni              foil                    **Inner 8**         Gd              |Gdoxide|
   **Outer 9**         Cu              foil                    **Inner 9**         Tb              |Tboxide|
   **Outer 10**        Zn              foil                    **Inner 10**        Dy              |Dyoxide|
   **Outer 11**        Ga              |Gaoxide|               **Inner 11**        Ho              |Hooxide|
   **Outer 12**        Ge              |Geoxide|               **Inner 12**        Er              |Eroxide|
   **Outer 13**        As              |Asoxide|               **Inner 13**        Tm              |Tmoxide|
   **Outer 14**        Se              metal powder            **Inner 14**        Yb              |Yboxide|
   **Outer 15**        Br              bromophenol blue        **Inner 15**        Lu              |Luoxide|
   **Outer 16**        Zr              foil                    **Inner 16**        Rb              |Rbcarbonate|
   **Outer 17**        Nb              foil                    **Inner 17**        Ba              *<absent>*
   **Outer 18**        Mo              foil                    **Inner 18**        Hf              |Hfoxide|
   **Outer 19**        Pt              foil                    **Inner 19**        Ta              |Taoxide|
   **Outer 20**        Au              foil                    **Inner 20**        W               *<absent>*
   **Outer 21**        Pb              foil                    **Inner 21**        Re              |Reoxide|
   **Outer 22**        Bi              |Bioxide|               **Inner 22**        Os              *<absent>*
   **Outer 23**        Sr              |Srtitanate|            **Inner 23**        Sc              metal powder
   **Outer 24**        Y               foil                    **Inner 24**        Ru              |Ruoxide|
   =============      ========        ===================     ==============      ========        ===============

+ For Th L\ :sub:`3`: Bi\ :sub:`1` will be used (outer 22)
+ For U L\ :sub:`3`: Y K will be used (outer 24)
+ For Pu L\ :sub:`3`: Zr K will be used (outer 16)
+ Bromophenol blue: |Brblue|

Four elements are missing: Ba, W, & Os, and Ir.

See also `BMM's complete list of standard materials
<https://nsls2.github.io/bmm-standards/BMM-standards.html>`__.

Here is a `spreadsheet
<https://github.com/NSLS2/bmm-profile-collection/blob/main/startup/standards/standards.xlsx>`__
containing a sheet for for :numref:`automated (see Section %s) <sample_wheel_automation>`
measurements of  the content of standards wheel.
